Development environment guide (#5486)
nextflow-io/nextflow: docs/developer-env.md

(developer-env)=

> # Environment setup

Reviewer: I think it'd be good to have an admonition / note thing saying "this is once you've installed Nextflow, click here for instructions on that". So that if anyone drops directly onto this page they're not confused.

Author: Added extra line.

> Setting up a Nextflow development environment is a prerequisite for creating, testing, and optimizing data analysis pipelines. The steps below outline recommended tools for setting up an optimal Nextflow development environment.

Reviewer: A brief TOC here would help I think, not sure if that's non-standard for these docs though.

:::{note}

> If you are using a Windows computer, you first need to install and configure the Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL). See {ref}`wsl` for installation instructions.

Reviewer: Why not put this at the top of the document then?

Author: Windows is used by a minor fraction of users, and if you're in bioinformatics, you likely already have this installed/setup. I wanted to keep it broad before getting specific for Windows users only.

Reviewer 2: I think I like Chris's approach here too.

1. Download VS Code installer for Windows.
1. Double-click the installer executable (`.exe`) file and follow the step-by-step setup installation wizard.

```

```{group-tab} macOS

To install VS Code on macOS:

1. Visit the [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/download) website.
1. Download VS Code for macOS.
1. Drag the `Visual Studio Code.app` application to the Applications folder to make it available in the macOS Launchpad.

```

```{group-tab} Linux

To install VS Code on Linux Debian/Ubuntu distributions:

1. Visit the [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/download) website.
1. Download VS Code Linux Debian/Ubuntu (`.deb`) distribution.
1. Open a new terminal window.
1. Navigate to the folder containing your VS Code download.
1. Run `sudo apt install ./<file>.deb`, replacing `<file>` with the full file name.
   
   :::{note}
   If you're using an older Linux distribution, run `sudo dpkg -i <file>.deb` to install VS Code and `sudo apt-get install -f` to install dependencies.
   :::
   
See [Linux installation](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/setup/linux#_installation) for information about installing VS Code on other distributions.

```

````

> ## Extensions

Reviewer: Worth mentioning the nf-core extension pack for other goodies?

Reviewer: Should be an h3 nested under VSCode? Or be called "VS Code Extensions"

Author: Nice. I'll add a section for nf-core and I'll update the title to "VS Code Extensions" to improve clarity and prevent too much nesting.

Extensions are a key feature of IDE's and allow you to customize your development environment by adding support for various programming languages, tools, and features. The [VS Code Marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/vscode) offers thousands of extensions that can enhance your productivity and tailor the editor to your specific needs.

### Nextflow

The VS Code [Nextflow extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=nextflow.nextflow) adds Nextflow language support to the editor. The Nextflow extension enhances development with:

- Diagnostics
- Hover hints
- Code navigation
- Code completion
- Formatting
- Renaming
- Parameter schemas
- DAG previews

See {ref}`vs-code-page` for more information about the Nextflow extension.

> ````{tabs}

Reviewer: This one is the same for all OS's right? No need for tabs here?

Author: Changed locally. Will push shortly.

The Remote Development extension pack includes four extensions:

- [Remote - SSH](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode-remote.remote-ssh) - Work with source code in any location by opening folders on a remote machine/VM using SSH.
- [Remote - Tunnels](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.remote-server) - Work with source code in any location by opening folders on a remote machine/VM using a VS Code Tunnel (rather than SSH).
- [Dev Containers](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode-remote.remote-containers) - Work with a separate toolchain or container based application by opening any folder mounted into or inside a container.
- [WSL](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode-remote.remote-wsl) - Get a Linux-powered development experience from the comfort of Windows by opening any folder in the Windows Subsystem for Linux.

:::{note}
The VS Code Remote Development extension pack is required if you are developing using remote servers, Windows Subsystem for Linux, or Development Containers.
:::

> ````{tabs}

Reviewer: Also the same for all OSs

Author: Changed locally. Will push shortly.

1. Follow the step-by-step setup installation prompts.
1. When the installation finishes, open a new terminal window and run `conda list` to verify Conda was installed correctly.

```

````
--->

## Git

Git provides powerful version control that helps track code changes. Git operates locally, meaning you don't need an internet connection to track changes, but it can also be used with remote platforms like GitHub, GitLab, or Bitbucket for collaborative development.

Nextflow seamlessly integrates with Git for source code management providers for managing pipelines as version-controlled Git repositories.

````{tabs}

```{group-tab} Windows

Git is already installed on most WSL distributions. You can check if it is already installed by running `git version`.

To install the latest stable Git version on Linux Debian/Ubuntu distributions:

1. Open a terminal window and run `sudo apt-get install git-all`.
1. Once complete, run `git version` to verify Git was installed.

See [git-scm documentation](https://git-scm.com/downloads/linux) for more information about installing Git on other Linux distributions.

```

```{group-tab} macOS

> Git installed is already installed on new versions of macOS. You can activate it through the terminal running `git version`. If Git is not installed, you can install the latest version of Git using several methods:

Reviewer: > Git installed is already installed on new versions of macOS.

You sure about that? Pretty sure that it hasn't shipped as default for a while now, you get prompted to install the XCode developer pack if you try to use it.

https://forums.developer.apple.com/forums/thread/672087

> DTS Engineer
> Apple
> Jan ’21
> `git` is not installed on macOS by default. The binary at `/usr/bin/git` is a shim that redirects any calls to that command line tool to the version in the current version of Xcode or the Command Line Tools downloadable package. This is so the tool is updated as Xcode updates, among other benefits.

Author: I'll double-check. The article I read said it was but it might have been out of date.

Author: Updated

1. Select the latest Ubuntu distribution.
1. Select **Get** and wait for Windows to download and install Ubuntu.
1. When it’s finished, select **Launch**.
1. A terminal window will appear. Wait for Ubuntu to finish installing, then create a new Linux username and password when prompted.

### PowerShell or Windows Command Prompt
--->

To enable WSL on Windows using Powershell or Windows Command Prompt:

1. Open PowerShell or Windows Command Prompt in administrator mode by right-clicking and selecting **Run as administrator**.
1. Run `wsl --install`.

    :::{note}
    This command will enable the features necessary to run WSL and install the Ubuntu distribution.
    :::

1. When prompted, restart Windows.
1. After restarting Windows, open the Ubuntu distribution using the **Start** menu and create a new Linux **User Name** and **Password** when prompted.

    :::{note}
    The **User Name** and **Password** is specific to each Linux distribution that you install and has no bearing on your Windows user name.
    :::

See [Set up a WSL development environment](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/setup/environment) for more information.

## Development Containers

> Development Containers (Dev Containers), are Docker containers that are specifically configured to provide a fully featured development environment. They can be used to run an application, to separate tools, libraries, or runtimes needed for working with a codebase. Dev Containers can be run locally or remotely, in a private or public cloud, and in a variety of supporting tools and editors.

Reviewer: Maybe link to https://containers.dev/

Author: Added

            // Configure properties specific to VS Code.
            "vscode": {
                // Set *default* container specific settings.json values on container create.
                "settings": {
                    "python.defaultInterpreterPath": "/opt/conda/bin/python"
                },

                // Add the IDs of extensions you want installed when the container is created.
                "extensions": ["ms-python.python", "ms-python.vscode-pylance", "nf-core.nf-core-extensionpack", "nextflow.nextflow"]
            }
        }
    }
    ```

    :::{note}
    Instead of using a prebuilt image, a custom Dockerfile may also live in the `.devcontainer` folder. You can replace the image property in `devcontainer.json` with dockerfile and utilize the custom container. See [Create a Dev Container](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/devcontainers/create-dev-container) for more information.
    :::

1. Enter **Dev Containers: Reopen in Container** in the VS Code Command Palette and reopen your project. You should now see the name of the container ("Nextflow Dev Container" if using the above example) in the bottom left corner of VS Code.

:::{note}

> Dev Containers can also be used by GitHub Codespaces in VS Code or the browser. See [GitHub Codespaces](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/codespaces) for more information.

Reviewer: Soon also GitPod (Flex)

Author: Added

> Dev Containers can also be used by GitHub Codespaces in VS Code or the browser. See [GitHub Codespaces](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/codespaces) for more information.

Reviewer 3: not sure this makes much sense in the context of nextflow workflow in which each process can have its own container. Our best practice is Conda + Wave for container reproducibility and portability

Author: Fair point. I'm not committed to keeping this. It's very thin on details and can get complicated quickly. I'll comment it out.

Reviewer: Yeah agree with this. I think that devcontainers for the pipeline development environment is not incompatible with using conda / wave etc for actually running the pipeline.

### Nextflow

The VS Code [Nextflow extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=nextflow.nextflow) adds Nextflow language support to the editor. The Nextflow extension enhances development with:

- Diagnostics
- Hover hints
- Code navigation
- Code completion
- Formatting
- Renaming
- Parameter schemas
- DAG previews

See {ref}`vs-code-page` for more information about the Nextflow extension.

````{tabs}

```{group-tab} Windows

To install the Nextflow VS Code extension on Windows:

1. Open VS Code.
1. Open the VS Code Extensions view in the left-hand menu.
1. Search for **Nextflow**.
1. Select **Install**.

```

```{group-tab} macOS

To install the Nextflow VS Code extension on macOS:

1. Open VS Code.
1. Open the VS Code Extensions view in the left-hand menu.
1. Search for **Nextflow**.
1. Select **Install**.

```

```{group-tab} Linux

To install the Nextflow VS Code extension on Linux Debian/Ubuntu distributions:

1. Open VS Code.
1. Open the VS Code Extensions view in the left-hand menu.
1. Search for **Nextflow**.
1. Select **Install**.

> ```

Author: It's the end of the group tab

- [WSL](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode-remote.remote-wsl) - Get a Linux-powered development experience from the comfort of Windows by opening any folder in the Windows Subsystem for Linux.

:::{note}
The VS Code Remote Development extension pack is required if you are developing using remote servers, Windows Subsystem for Linux, or Development Containers.
:::

````{tabs}

```{group-tab} Windows

To install the Remote Development extension pack on Windows:

1. Open VS Code.
1. Open the VS Code Extensions view in the left-hand menu.
1. Search for **Remote Development**.
1. Select **Install**.

```

```{group-tab} macOS

To install the Remote Development extension pack on macOS:

1. Open VS Code.
1. Open the VS Code Extensions view in the left-hand menu.
1. Search for **Remote Development**.
1. Select **Install**.

```

```{group-tab} Linux

To install the Remote Development extension pack on Linux Debian/Ubuntu distributions:

1. Open VS Code.
1. Open the VS Code Extensions view in the left-hand menu.
1. Search for **Remote Development**.
1. Select **Install**.

```

````

(docker-desktop)=

## Docker

> Containerization enables the creation of self-contained and fully reproducible computational pipelines by bundling a script's binary dependencies into a standardized and portable format. Containers can be executed on any platform that supports a container runtime and ensures consistency across different environments.

Author: Nicer progression 👍 Manually edited

    :::{note}
    You won't be able to select which backend to use if your system only supports one of the two options.
    :::

1. Follow the instructions on the installation wizard to authorize the installer and proceed with the install.
1. When the installation is complete, select **Close**.
1. Start Docker Desktop.
1. Review the Docker Subscription Service Agreement and, if you agree, select **Accept** to continue.

    :::{note}
    Docker Desktop won't run if you do not agree to the terms. You can choose to accept the terms at a later date by opening Docker Desktop.
    :::

1. Docker Desktop starts after you accept the terms.

```

```{group-tab} macOS

To install Docker Desktop on macOS:

1. Visit the [Install Docker Desktop on Mac](https://docs.docker.com/desktop/install/mac-install/) page.
1. Download the installer for your chip type using the download buttons at the top of the page.
1. Double-click `Docker.dmg` to open the installer.
1. Drag the Docker icon to the **Applications** folder to make it available in the macOS Launchpad.
1. Double-click **Docker.app** in the **Applications** folder to start Docker.

> 1. Review the Docker Subscription Service Agreement and, if you agree, select **Accept** to continue.

Reviewer 4: I think this note should be added here too

:::{note}
    Docker Desktop won't run if you do not agree to the terms. You can choose to accept the terms at a later date by opening Docker Desktop.
    :::

> 1. Review the Docker Subscription Service Agreement and, if you agree, select **Accept** to continue.

Reviewer 4: That said, if I have to accept the terms for Docker Desktop to run but I can also accept them at a later date does that mean Docker Desktop will work anyway? 

Perhaps we can remove this note throughout and rather have something like: 

"Review the Docker Subscription Service Agreement and select **Accept** to continue. Docker Desktop won't run if you do not agree to the terms."

Obviously this depends on the exact behavior when someone does/doesn't accept the terms which I'm not 100% sure of.

Nextflow seamlessly integrates with Git for source code management providers for managing pipelines as version-controlled Git repositories.

````{tabs}

```{group-tab} Windows

Git is already installed on most WSL distributions. You can check if it is already installed by running `git version`.

To install the latest stable Git version on Linux Debian/Ubuntu distributions:

1. Open a terminal window and run `sudo apt-get install git-all`.
1. Once complete, run `git version` to verify Git was installed.

See [git-scm documentation](https://git-scm.com/downloads/linux) for more information about installing Git on other Linux distributions.

```

```{group-tab} macOS

To install Git on macOS with [Homebrew](https://docs.brew.sh/):

1. Open a terminal window and run `brew install git`.

   :::{note}
   You must have Homebrew installed. See [Homebrew installation](https://docs.brew.sh/Installation) for instructions.
   :::

1. Once complete, run `git version` to verify Git was installed.

To install Git on macOS with [Xcode](https://developer.apple.com/xcode/):

1. Open the App Store on your Mac.

> 1. Sign in to your Apple Account.

Reviewer 4: Technically the user should already be signed in but if not, I'd move this to step 1.

Author: Manually removed

To install the latest stable Git version on Linux Debian/Ubuntu distributions:

1. Open a terminal window and run `sudo apt-get install git-all`.
1. Once complete, run `git version` to verify Git was installed.

See [git-scm documentation](https://git-scm.com/downloads/linux) for more information about installing Git on other Linux distributions.

```

````

(wsl)=

## Windows Subsystem for Linux

Developers can access the power of both Windows and Linux on a Windows machine. The Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) lets developers install a Linux distribution and use Linux applications, utilities, and Bash command-line tools directly on Windows without the overhead of a virtual machine or dual-boot setup.

WSL is an optional feature on Windows 10 version 2004 and higher (Build 19041 and higher) or Windows 11. You can enable it through PowerShell or Windows Command Prompt. The steps below outline the recommended setup.

<!---
### Windows Features dialog

To enable WSL on Windows using Windows Features dialog:

1. In the Windows search bar, enter 'features' to bring up the **Turn Windows Features on and off** dialog.
1. Scroll down and check **Windows Subsystem for Linux**.

> 1. Select **OK** and restart Windows.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. Select **OK**.
```

Reviewer 4: Is the **OK** a confirmation to restart Windows or is there a next step?

1. After restarting Windows, check that you have WSL enabled by opening a Command Prompt or PowerShell and typing `wsl`.

To install Ubuntu on WSL:

1. Go to **Start Button > Microsoft Store**.
1. Enter 'Linux' into the search field, then click **Run Linux on Windows**.
1. Select the latest Ubuntu distribution.
1. Select **Get** and wait for Windows to download and install Ubuntu.
1. When it’s finished, select **Launch**.
1. A terminal window will appear. Wait for Ubuntu to finish installing, then create a new Linux username and password when prompted.

### PowerShell or Windows Command Prompt
--->

To enable WSL on Windows using Powershell or Windows Command Prompt:

> 1. Open PowerShell or Windows Command Prompt in administrator mode by right-clicking and selecting **Run as administrator**.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. Right-click and select **Run as administrator** to use PowerShell or Windows Command Prompt in administrator mode.
```

1. Run `wsl --install`.

    :::{note}
    This command will enable the features necessary to run WSL and install the Ubuntu distribution.
    :::

1. When prompted, restart Windows.

> 1. After restarting Windows, open the Ubuntu distribution using the **Start** menu and create a new Linux **User Name** and **Password** when prompted.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. After restarting Windows, open the Ubuntu distribution and create a new Linux **User Name** and **Password** when prompted.
```

    :::{note}
    The **User Name** and **Password** is specific to each Linux distribution that you install and has no bearing on your Windows user name.
    :::

See [Set up a WSL development environment](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/setup/environment) for more information.

## Development Containers

> [Development Containers](https://containers.dev/) (Dev Containers), are Docker containers that are specifically configured to provide a fully featured development environment. They can be used to run an application, to separate tools, libraries, or runtimes needed for working with a codebase. Dev Containers can be run locally or remotely, in a private or public cloud, and in a variety of supporting tools and editors.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[Development Containers](https://containers.dev/) (Dev Containers), are Docker containers that are specifically configured to provide a full-featured development environment. They can be used to run an application, to separate tools, libraries, or runtimes needed for working with a codebase. Dev Containers can be run locally or remotely, in a private or public cloud, and in a variety of supporting tools and editors.
```

VS code and Docker are required to create and manage your Dev Containers. See {ref}`vscode-install` and {ref}`docker-desktop` for installation instructions.

### Development Containers extension

> The VS Code Dev Containers extension lets you use a container as a full-featured development environment. It allows you to open any folder inside (or mounted into) a container and take advantage of VS Code's full feature set.

Reviewer 4: We've said "full-featured" 3 times in the past few paragraphs. Maybe we can remove these two or use a different adjective? I'm coming up blank right now though!

1. Navigate to the folder where you downloaded VS Code.
1. Run `sudo apt install ./<file>.deb`, replacing `<file>` with the full file name.
   
   :::{note}
   If you're using an older Linux distribution, run `sudo dpkg -i <file>.deb` to install VS Code and `sudo apt-get install -f` to install dependencies.
   :::
   
See [Linux installation](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/setup/linux#_installation) for information about installing VS Code on other distributions.

```

````

## VS Code Extensions

Extensions are a key feature of IDEs and allow you to customize your development environment by adding support for various programming languages, tools, and features. The [VS Code Marketplace](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/vscode) offers thousands of extensions that can enhance your productivity and tailor the editor to your specific needs.

### Nextflow

The VS Code [Nextflow extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=nextflow.nextflow) adds Nextflow language support to the editor. The Nextflow extension enhances development with:

- Diagnostics
- Hover hints
- Code navigation
- Code completion
- Formatting
- Renaming
- Parameter schemas
- DAG previews

> See {ref}`vs-code-page` for more information about the Nextflow extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the {ref}`vs-code-page` documentation for more information about the Nextflow extension.
```

> ````{tabs}

Reviewer: Can we have just one of these for "installing VSCode extensions"? Feels bulky to have essentially the identical content repeated for each set of VSCode extensions.

At the moment the VSCode section is like, most of the page. I think making each subsection shorter would help.

Author: Done.

- [EditorConfig](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=EditorConfig.EditorConfig) - Support for EditorConfig project files for code standardisation.
- [indent-rainbow](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=oderwat.indent-rainbow) - Highlight indentation levels, especially if they're inconsistent.
- [Nextflow](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=nextflow.nextflow) - Nextflow language support.
- [Prettier](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=esbenp.prettier-vscode) - Code formatter using Prettier.
- [Rainbow CSV](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=mechatroner.rainbow-csv) - Highlight columns in .CSV files in different colors.
- [Ruff](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=charliermarsh.ruff) - An extremely fast Python linter and code formatter, written in Rust.
- [Todo Tree](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=Gruntfuggly.todo-tree) - Show TODO, FIXME, etc. comment tags in a tree view.
- [YAML](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=redhat.vscode-yaml) - YAML Language Support by Red Hat, with built-in Kubernetes syntax support.

> - [Markdown Extended](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=jebbs.markdown-extended) - Gives Markdown previews, including admonitions.

Reviewer: I'm slightly wary of actually listing them out like this, as it's the kind of thing that could get stale quite quickly. Would prefer something more generic like "a number of useful extensions that come recommended from community members, such as ..." then like 2 or 3 specific examples.

Author: I can see your point. I'll shrink this (and the other extensions) down

Author: I've shorted this text and removed the repeated code blocks.

1. Open VS Code.
1. Open the **Extensions** view in the left-hand menu.
1. Search for **nf-core-extensionpack**.
1. Select **Install**.

```

````

(remote-development-ext)=

### Remote Development

The [Remote Development extension pack](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode-remote.vscode-remote-extensionpack) enables you to run WSL, SSH, or a development container for editing and debugging with the full set of VS Code features.

The Remote Development extension pack contains 4 extensions:

- [Remote - SSH](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode-remote.remote-ssh) - Work with source code in any location by opening folders on a remote machine/VM using SSH.
- [Remote - Tunnels](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.remote-server) - Work with source code in any location by opening folders on a remote machine/VM using a VS Code Tunnel (rather than SSH).
- [Dev Containers](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode-remote.remote-containers) - Work with a separate toolchain or container based application by opening any folder mounted into or inside a container.

> - [WSL](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode-remote.remote-wsl) - Get a Linux-powered development experience from the comfort of Windows by opening any folder in the Windows Subsystem for Linux.

Reviewer: I'm a bit confused by these as they're not really remote..? Maybe worth addressing this given the heading?

Author: I think they are treated as remote file systems. Using the same language as used in the pack description. Main purpose is for windows developers and those accessing remote file systems.

Reviewer 5: The VSCode experience in WSL is basically the same as native Windows

Also, this text seems overly promotional

Author: I agree the text is very promotional. I took the text from [here](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/remote-overview), I'll tone it down.

1. Follow the installation instructions.
1. When the installation finishes, open a new terminal window and run `conda list` to verify Conda was installed correctly.

```

````
--->

## Git

Git provides powerful version control that helps track code changes. Git operates locally, meaning you don't need an internet connection to track changes, but it can also be used with remote platforms like GitHub, GitLab, or Bitbucket for collaborative development.

Nextflow seamlessly integrates with Git for source code management providers for managing pipelines as version-controlled Git repositories.

````{tabs}

```{group-tab} Windows

Git is already installed on most WSL distributions. You can check if it is already installed by running `git version`.

To install the latest stable Git version on Linux Debian/Ubuntu distributions:

1. Open a terminal window and run `sudo apt-get install git-all`.
1. Once complete, run `git version` to verify Git was installed.

See [git-scm documentation](https://git-scm.com/downloads/linux) for more information about installing Git on other Linux distributions.

```

```{group-tab} macOS

> To install Git on macOS with [Homebrew](https://docs.brew.sh/):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Arguably the easiest way to install Git on macOS is with [Homebrew](https://docs.brew.sh/):
```

Author: I'd rather keep the language neutral but I can see why having two options is confusing. I'll drop Xcode and point to external docs.

1. Open a terminal window and run `brew install git`.

   :::{note}
   You must have Homebrew installed. See [Homebrew installation](https://docs.brew.sh/Installation) for instructions.
   :::

1. Once complete, run `git version` to verify Git was installed.

> To install Git on macOS with [Xcode](https://developer.apple.com/xcode/):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can install Git on macOS as part of [Xcode](https://developer.apple.com/xcode/):
```

1. Open the App Store on your Mac.
1. Search for Xcode.
1. Select **Install**.
1. Once complete, open a new terminal window and run `git version` to verify Git was installed.

```

```{group-tab} Linux

Git is already installed on most Linux Debian/Ubuntu distributions.

To install the latest stable Git version on Linux Debian/Ubuntu distributions:

1. Open a terminal window and run `sudo apt-get install git-all`.
1. Once complete, run `git version` to verify Git was installed.

See [git-scm documentation](https://git-scm.com/downloads/linux) for more information about installing Git on other Linux distributions.

```

````

(wsl)=

> ## Windows Subsystem for Linux

Reviewer: This still feels to me to be more part of the Nextflow installation, rather than Dev Environment.

Personally I'd rather remove it from this page entirely.

1. Select the latest Ubuntu distribution.
1. Select **Get** and wait for Windows to download and install Ubuntu.
1. When it’s finished, select **Launch**.
1. A terminal window will appear. Wait for Ubuntu to finish installing, then create a new Linux username and password when prompted.

### PowerShell or Windows Command Prompt
--->

To enable WSL on Windows using Powershell or Windows Command Prompt:

1. Right-click and select **Run as administrator** to use PowerShell or Windows Command Prompt in administrator mode.
1. Run `wsl --install`.

    :::{note}
    This command will enable the features necessary to run WSL and install the Ubuntu distribution.
    :::

1. When prompted, restart Windows.
1. After restarting Windows, open the Ubuntu distribution and create a new Linux **User Name** and **Password** when prompted.

    :::{note}
    The **User Name** and **Password** is specific to each Linux distribution that you install and has no bearing on your Windows user name.
    :::

See [Set up a WSL development environment](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/setup/environment) for more information.

> ## Development Containers

Reviewer: I wonder if this section would be better off as a blog post that we can point to in an admonition from this page.

(a) This part feels quite a lot more detailed than the rest of the page and (b) I feel that devcontainers are more of a "this can be a nice thing" rather than a requirement. I, and I guess the majority, of Nextflow developers have never used this.

Author: I think it's emerging but not especially common. I'll drop it from this page and add it to the list of possible blog posts (maybe something @kenibrewer would want to write)

Reviewer 5: We also have a "Tutorials" section in the Nextflow docs as a temporary home for tutorial-like content until we have something better on seqera.io, so if you want something more permanent than a blog post you can put it there.

Blog post or tutorial would be more appropriate for dev containers for now IMO

Author: Okay, great. I think it's agreed that it should be removed from the PR. I'll keep the text in case we can recycle it for a blog or tutorial. Depending on how it's pitched, it could be wrapped up into a tutorial or blog. Either way, we can put it aside for now.

Author: I've commented this out for now. I'll keep the text incase someone wants to write a blog in the new year.
